About me

About Me information is the most important details that a person wants to share with professionals in health and social care. This information might include how best to communicate with the person, how to help them feel at ease or details about how they like to take their medication. The PRSB has published a standard outlining how About Me information should be documented and shared in health and care records.

Latest release v1.2

The standard is now aligned with updates to the Core information standard and Urgent transfer from care home to hospital to keep consistency. Please see the detailed V1.2 Release notes, outlining the changes to this latest version.

Sharing information across health and social care

The ‘About Me’ information standard is part of a wider set of standards, published in November 2020. PRSB was asked by NHS Digital to help to create national standards for sharing information between health and social care, drawing on the learning from successful local projects to speed up national roll out and adoption.

Endorsement

This standard has been endorsed by the following organisations;

British Association for Music Therapy
British Dietetic Association
British Geriatrics Society
British Psychological Society
Care Provider Alliance
Care Software Providers Association (CASPA)
Chartered Society of Physiotherapy
Compassion in Dying
Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland
Institute of Health Records and Information Management
Local Government Association
Royal College of Emergency Medicine
Royal College of General Practitioners
Royal College of Nursing
Royal College of Occupational Therapists
Royal College of Physicians
Royal Pharmaceutical Society
Why is ‘About Me’ so important?

Clinical Informatics Lead of the Social Care Programme at NHS Digital, Keith Strahan, explains the crucial importance of ‘About Me’ information in records.

About me standard v1.2
V1.2 View the standard
V1.2 Download the standard (xlsx file)
V1.2 Release notes
Supporting documents
Implementation guidance
Digital social care final report
Survey 1 Report
Hazard log
Safety case
PRSB’s patient lead – Sam discusses the standard and current implementation work

Watch a video clip introduction to the About me standard and an update on the successful implementation at Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust.

IHRIM record correction guidance

Despite vigilance when filing information in records, mistakes can occur. The Institute of Health Records and Information Management has guidance to support professionals in making corrections following errors.

VIEW THE GUIDANCE