Assessment Discharge and Withdrawal - FHIR

Support transfer of care from hospital to social services for patients with care and support needs.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this
Related APIs
Status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Additional guidance

This integration is deprecated, but we do not have any plans to retire it.

For more details, see the status.

Overview
Hospital system
MESH
Social services
send admission, assessment, discharge and withdrawal notices 
receive admission,
assessment, discharge
 and withdrawal notices

 

Use this integration to support transfer of care from hospital to social services for patients with care and support needs, as described in the Care Act 2014. It enables the exchange of structured information between hospitals and social care organisations.

You can send:

hospital assessment notices to inform social services that an assessment of a patient's care and support needs is required
hospital discharge notices to confirm a patient's proposed discharge date
withdrawal notices to withdraw a previous assessment or discharge notice

You can also send an admissions notice with this integration so a hospital can inform social services that a patient has been admitted.

This is a messaging integration which uses MESH to send and receive messages.

Information Standard SCCI2075 defines the minimum data sets that you must use for Assessment, Discharge and Withdrawal (ADW) notices. For additional message guidance on the implementation and use of ADW FHIR messages and some divergences from this ADW Information Standard, see Assessment Discharge and Withdrawal - FHIR API.

This integration is deprecated. Do not begin any development work using this API.

Who can use this

This integration can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development. 

You must have made this request before you can go live (see 'Onboarding' below).

Related APIs

The following API is related to this integration:

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this API to transfer messages and large files securely across health and social care organisations
Status

This integration is deprecated, meaning:

new integrations are not allowed
we will not make any updates to it
it is still available for use
service levels still apply

We do not have any plans to retire it.

This specification is deprecated following changes to the discharge process guidance during 2020 to reflect Discharge to Assess (D2A). If you have any concerns, contact enquires@nhsdigital.nhs.uk.

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational  24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration sends a FHIR DSTU2 payload over MESH.

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

You can access this integration via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
the internet

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This integration uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

This integration does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database.

For more details see our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

This integration uses MESH.

We have developed an Interoperability Toolkit (ITK) ADW-MESH validator to help you check that your messages are valid according to ITK FHIR schemas and requirements before they are set over MESH.

As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

This integration is deprecated and is not available for new onboarding.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this integration, see Social Care Assessment, Discharge and Withdrawal.

This FHIR messaging specification is based on and is intended to be used alongside the FHIR DSTU2 specification, published in September 2015.

The following MESH workflow IDs are used to send the admission, assessment, discharge and withdrawal notifications in England:

Scenario	From	To	MESH Workflow ID
Send admission notice 	Hospital systems	Social care service systems	SOCCARE_ADMISSN_NTC
Send assessment notice	Hospital systems	Social care service systems	SOCCARE_ASSESS_NTC
Send assessment notice accepted response 	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_ASSESS_NTC__ACPT
Send assessment notice rejected response	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_ASSESS_NTC_RJT
Send discharge notice	Hospital systems	Social care service systems	SOCCARE_DISCH_NTC
Send discharge notice accepted response	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_DISCH_NTC_ACPT
Send assessment notice rejected response	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_DISCH_NTC_RJT
Send withdrawal notice	Hospital systems	Social care service systems	SOCCARE_WDRAW_NTC
Send withdrawal notice accepted response	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_WDRAW_NTC_ACPT
Send withdrawal notice rejected response	Social care service systems	Hospital systems	SOCCARE_WDRAW__NTC_RJT
Additional guidance

For additional guidance on interactions for this integration, see the Social care DMS - additional messaging guidance.

Last edited: 12 October 2022 6:18 pm