Core information standard v2.0

The Core information standard defines a set of information that can potentially be shared between systems in different sites and settings, among professionals and people using services. Version 1.0 of the standard was produced following consultation with more than 1,500 individuals and organisations through online and face-to-face workshops and a survey. 

In January 2021, PRSB was commissioned by NHSX to update the Core information standard from a conceptual information model to a logical model.


What is new in V2.0?

The updated Core information standard includes;

A new logical model that will enable consistency of clinical content, data types, value sets and semantic messages
A clinical relationship model that links relationships within sections and elements of the standard, this can be used by implementers to develop physical models.
Aligns with many other published PRSB standards including Maternity, Healthy child and the Community pharmacy standard.
Updates from the Social care programme including more detail of the services being provided to a person such as equipment and adaptions as well as vital About me content – the information a person wants to share with health and care professionals.
Alignment with FHIR. We are working closely with the NHS Digital interoperability team to align V2.0 to the UK core R4 FHIR profiles. This is in progress and with work completed on many areas such as person demographics, allergies and adverse reactions, medications and medical devices.

Using the standard in five community settings: pharmacy, optometry, dentistry, ambulance and community services

PRSB has extended the use of the Core information standard for shared care records to professionals working in pharmacy, optometry, dentistry, ambulance and community services, following widespread consultation with clinicians, people using these services and a range of PRSB stakeholders.

This will ensure that professionals working in these care settings have access to the right information at the right time to provide clinically safe and effective care, subject to appropriate information governance controls. Using the standard in these settings should improve care and outcomes for people, and it should improve the working lives of professionals who won’t need to create workarounds or log into multiple systems to ensure they have a complete picture of a person’s current and relevant care history, before starting treatment.


Endorsement

The core information standard V1 is endorsed by the following organisations:

Academy of Medical Royal Colleges
British Dietetic Association (BDA)
British Orthodontic Society
British Psychological Society
Care Providers Alliance
Carers UK
Chartered Society of Physiotherapists
College of Paramedics
Institute of Health Records and Information Management
National Voices
Patient Information Forum
Queens Nursing Institute
Royal College of Anaesthetists
Royal College of Emergency Medicine
Royal College of General Practitioners
Royal College of Midwives
Royal College of Nursing
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists
Royal College of Ophthalmologists
Royal College of Paediatrics & Child Health
Royal College of Pathologists
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists
Royal College of Surgeons
View the Core information standard
Supporting documentation
Core information standard use in five community settings

Clinical safety case report – publishing soon
Core information standard V1 documentation
IHRIM record correction guidance

Despite vigilance when filing information in records, mistakes can occur. The Institute of Health Records and Information Management has guidance to support professionals in making corrections following errors.

VIEW THE GUIDANCE