Digital Medicine - FHIR API

Notify a patient's registered GP practice about care services delivered at a pharmacy, such as an immunisation.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions

Parts of this API are planned for deprecation and retirement. For more details, see API status.

Overview

Use this API to notify a patient's registered GP practice about care services delivered at a pharmacy.

You can send notifications about:

an immunisation given

an emergency medication dispensed without a prescription

Notifications take the form of FHIR messages sent via MESH.

You cannot currently send notifications about:

a minor illness referral consultation 

a medication review

an appliance use review

a New Medicine Service (NMS) appointment

For more details, see API status.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below).

Related APIs

The following API is related to this API:

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this API to transfer messages and large files securely across health and social care organisations

Additionally, use the following API standard to implement this API:

Interoperability Toolkit 3 Messaging Distribution FHIR API standards - use this API standard to implement a set of generic messaging components using HL7 FHIR STU3 to create a unified approach to NHS message and document flows across England
API status

This API consists of six different notification types. The status of each message type is as follows:

Notification type	Status
immunisation	private beta - in active use, but with a limited number of connecting applications 
emergency medication dispensed without prescription	private beta - in active use, but with a limited number of connecting applications
minor illness referral consultation	alpha - planned for future use
medication review	alpha - unused, obsolete and planned for retirement
appliance use review	alpha - unused, obsolete and planned for retirement
New Medicine Service (NMS) review	alpha - unused, obsolete and planned for retirement

If you would like to be involved in our beta programme, contact us.

Service level

This API uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This is an asynchronous messaging API. The notifications take the form of FHIR STU3 messages sent via MESH.

For more details, see FHIR and MESH.

Network access

You can access this API via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)

the internet

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

The API does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database.

For more details see our national RBAC database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

This API uses MESH.

As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

You need to get your software approved by us before it can go live with this API. We call this onboarding. The onboarding process can sometimes be quite long, so it’s worth planning well ahead.

To onboard for this API, contact us.

Interactions

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

The following versions are published:

Status	Release version	Release date	Details
Private beta	1.2.5-Private Beta	19 March 2021	Change from Digital Minor Illness Referral Service to Minor Illness Referral Consultation
Private beta	1.2.4-Private Beta	3 March 2021	Example scenarios for COVID vaccination flows
Private beta	1.2.3-Private Beta	4 May 2020	 
Private beta	1.2.2-Private-Beta	1 April 2020	Current Private Beta version of the specification
Private beta	1.2.1-Private-Beta	2 December 2019	Version 1.2.1-Private-Beta
Private beta	1.2.0-Private-Beta	30 September 2019	Version 1.2.0-Private-Beta
Alpha	1.1.3-Alpha	9 August 2019	Version 1.1.3-Alpha
Alpha	1.1.2-Alpha	26 July 2019	Version 1.1.2-Alpha
Alpha	1.1.1-Alpha	8 July 2019	Version 1.1.1-Alpha
Alpha	1.1.0-Alpha	19 March 2019	Version 1.1.0-Alpha

 

Last edited: 8 March 2022 8:11 am