Digital Child Health - FHIR

Share information about a child's health between healthcare workers. 

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this
Related APIs
Status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview
Sending System

NEMS
publish event
MESH

send event to all
subscribing systems

Subscribed
System B

Subscribed
System A

Subscribed
System C

manage subscriptions

 

Use this integration to share information about a child's health between healthcare workers.

This information is recorded throughout a child's clinical pathway or patient journey about:

health events
clinical contacts 

These events or contacts happen either as part of:

a planned Healthy Child Programme
unplanned GP or Emergency Department visits

Examples of such events include creating, updating or deleting a record of a:

blood spot test outcome
newborn hearing test
Newborn and Infant Physical Examination (NIPE) outcome

This integration uses a publish-subscribe model - the sending system publishes events to National Events Management Service (NEMS), and NEMS forwards the events to all subscribed systems via MESH.

Subscribed systems might be GPs, emergency departments, local authorities or some other care provider. Potentially, patients and carers could also share this information.

For more information see Digital Child Health specification versions.

Before you begin any development work using this integration, contact us to discuss your best options.

Who can use this

This integration can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so.

Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development. To do this, contact us. 

For details of the legal basis for sharing NEMS events, see the NEMS controller catalogue.

You must do this before you can go live (see 'Onboarding' below).

Related APIs

The following APIs and integrations are also related to this one:

National Events Management Service (NEMS) - use this to publish and subscribe to patient-centric event messages

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this to collect events that you have subscribed to

Child Protection - Information Sharing - HL7 V3 API - use this to access child protection information from Child Protection - Information Sharing (CP-IS) as a local authority or an unscheduled care provider using our HL7 V3 API

Status

This integration is in production.

Service level

This integration is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration uses FHIR.

It uses a publish-subscribe model and is specifically based on the HL7 FHIR STU3 Messaging Implementation.

Use our National Events Management Service (NEMS) integration to subscribe to events.

Use our MESH API to collect event messages that you have subscribed to.

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

This integration is available on the internet and on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This integration uses NEMS and the MESH API which are application-restricted, meaning we authenticate the calling application but not the end user.

You can use this pattern as follows:

unattended (end user not present), for example as part of a back end process to check NHS numbers for data flowing from one system to another

attended (end user present) - in which case, you must ensure the end user is authenticated and suitably authorised locally by the calling application

In particular, this integration uses TLS-MA authentication.

It also implements authorisation controls which restrict the event types that the connecting application can subscribe to or publish.

For more details, see application-restricted APIs.

Environments and testing

This integration uses NEMS, which is available in Opentest for early development and testing.

NEMS is also available for testing purposes in:

development (DEV)

integration (INT)

deployment (DEP)

The base URLs are as follows:

Environment	Network availability	URL
OpenTest	OpenVPN	https://msg.opentest.hscic.gov.uk/
Development	HSCN	https://msg.dev.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Integration	HSCN	https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Integration	Internet	https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/
Deployment	HSCN	https://msg.dep.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Production	HSCN	To be supplied
Production	Internet	To be supplied

The  base URL for the publishing and subscribing interactions are the same, but the path is different, for example:

publish in integration over HSCN:
https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/STU3/Events/1/$process-message
subscribe in integration over HSCN:
https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/STU3/Subscription
publish in integration over the internet:
https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Events/1/$process-message
subscribe in integration over the internet:
https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Subscription

There is a testing tool which allows you to simulate a provider publishing event messages. You can also simulate making changes on PDS to trigger PDS-published event messages so you can test event message consumption.

To get advice on how to begin testing, contact us.

For more details, see the NEMS onboarding guide on getting access to Opentest and the integration (INT) test environment.

Onboarding

You need to get your software approved by us before it can go live with this integration. We call this onboarding. The onboarding process can sometimes be quite long, so it’s worth planning well ahead.

To outline your use case and start the onboarding process for this integration, contact us.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this integration, see Publish an Event Message and Subscriptions Overview.

This integration supports the following event types:

Blood Spot Test Outcome
Newborn Hearing
NIPE Outcome
Professional Contacts
Vaccinations

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 13 October 2022 5:28 pm