Directory of Services - Urgent and Emergency Care - REST API

Access information on a wide range of health and care services across England using our Directory of Services (DoS) Urgent and Emergency Care REST API.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to access Directory of Services (DoS) information on a wide range of health and care services across England. 

You can search for services based on a combination of parameters: 

the patient’s age, sex, and current location
the patient’s clinical need
the timeframe in which the patient needs a service

You can also search for services using similar parameters, such as by:

service type - find matching service type ID, location and optional patient details
clinical term - find matching symptoms, location and optional patient details
ODS code - find active services with a matching ODS code
service ID - find active services with a matching service identifier

This service is widely used in an Urgent and Emergency Care context. For example, NHS 111 use it to find a service in real-time with the capacity to help a patient with given symptoms, within range of a given location, in a given time frame.

You need a valid DoS account to use this API.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you complete an access request form before you go too far with your development. See our acceptable use policy for more details.

You must have made this request before you can go live (see 'Onboarding' below).

Related APIs

The following APIs are related to this one:

Directory of Services - Urgent and Emergency Care - SOAP API - use this SOAP API to access information on a wide range of health and care services across England
EPS Directory of Services - REST API - use this to access information about dispensing services, including searching for dispensers who can provide services for a patient with a given location and urgency
Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions Web Services - SOAP API - use this to access EPS dispenser (and dispensing appliance contractor) information for a patient via NHS UK Web Services
e-Referral Services - A010 Patient service search endpoint - use this endpoint to find services that meet the referral needs of a patient
NHS UK service search - use this to search for services by organisation, or organisation type
API status

This API is stable.

Service level

This API is a gold service, meaning it is operational and supported 24 x 7 x 365.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a REST API.

For more details, see Basic REST.

We also have a Directory of Services - Urgent and Emergency Care - SOAP API available.

Network access

This API is available on the internet and, indirectly, on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

You need a valid DoS account to use this API.

This API uses HTTP basic authentication. We use authentication to track API usage and to control which information is returned to a search.

HTTP basic authentication is built in to all HTTP clients and requires the Authorization request header with the DoS username and password colon delimited and base64 encoded.

Environments and testing

For details of testing and production (live) environments, see Environments Overview.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

As part of onboarding, you must submit an access request and email it to the DoS live service team, see Request for access to NHS Digital urgent and emergency Care DoS.

Requests are subject to an application process including review by the DoS Steering Group.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see the DoS REST API.

Last edited: 19 January 2022 4:32 pm