Electronic Prescription Service Tracker - REST API

Track a patient’s prescriptions using our Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) Tracker API.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status and roadmap
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to track a patient’s prescriptions within the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) using our Electronic Prescription Service Tracker.

You can search for a list of prescriptions that meet your query parameters by providing: 

patient's NHS number (mandatory)
format (mandatory)
prescription date range (optional)
prescription status (optional)
prescription version (optional)

Once you find the prescription, or if you already know its details, you can retrieve it by providing:

prescription ID (mandatory)
format (mandatory)
issue number (optional)

For more details, see Introduction to Spine EPS Tracker.

This API is only for use when the end user is a healthcare worker, not a patient. You can vote to make it available to patients on our interactive backlog. 

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development, by contacting us at epsonboarding@nhs.net.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below).

Related APIs

The following endpoint of the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) FHIR API is currently in development and also gives access to prescription tracking:

EPS FHIR API Tracker endpoint - use this to search for summary details about a prescription

The following APIs also give access to EPS:

Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - access the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) - currently you can only use this new API to prescribe, not dispense or track prescriptions

Electronic Prescription Service - HL7 V3 API - use this if you want to use functions that are not yet available in the FHIR API

Signing Service - use this to digitally sign a prescription

The following APIs may be required when accessing EPS:

Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - use this to obtain patient data
API status and roadmap

This API is in beta, meaning:

it's available in production to all comers

it might still be subject to breaking changes

To see our roadmap, or to suggest, comment or vote on features for this API, see our interactive product backlog.

Service level

This API is a platinum service, meaning it is operational and supported 24 x 7 x 365.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a REST API.

For more details, see Basic REST.

Network access

This API is available on the internet and, indirectly, on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN). 

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API is application-restricted, meaning:

the calling application is authenticated - we do care who it is

the end user is not authenticated - we do not verify who it is or whether they are present

In particular, it uses TLS Mutual Authentication (TLS-MA).

This API is only for use when the end user is a healthcare worker, not a patient.

In addition, we require calling applications to:

authenticate end users locally with a minimum of user ID and password

use role-based access control (RBAC) locally to control end user access to the patient data

keep an audit trail locally of all accesses to patient data by end users

Environments and testing

You can test this API using our Path to Live environments.

The base URL for production is https://mm-sync.national.ncrs.nhs.uk/mm/prescriptions

Onboarding

You need to get your software approved by us before it can go live with this API. We call this onboarding. The onboarding process can sometimes be quite long, so it’s worth planning well ahead.

To onboard for this API, follow the Supplier Conformance Assessment List (SCAL) process after contacting us at epsonboarding@nhs.net.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see the Development Overview.

Last edited: 19 January 2022 5:13 pm