Electronic Prescription Service Directory of Services API

Access information about dispensing services, including searching for dispensers who can provide services for a patient with a given location and urgency, using our Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) Directory of Services (DoS) API.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to access information about dispensing services, including searching for dispensers who can provide services for a patient with a given location and urgency.

You can:

search for a dispenser by its location and opening hours
search for a specific dispenser that the patient might have named

The API combines data from both the Directory of Services (DoS) and Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions (ETP) web services (formerly known as NHS Choices).

It uses DoS for user authentication.

Do not use this API if you are building GP software - instead use Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions (ETP) web services directly, as it provides access to information you'll need, for example, information such as dispensing appliance contractors.

 

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below).

Related APIs

The following APIs are related to this API:

Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API  - access the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) - currently you can only use this new API to prescribe, not dispense.

Electronic Prescription Service - HL7 V3 API - access the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) to send prescriptions from prescribers such as GPs to dispensers such as pharmacies using our HL7 V3 API.

Prescription Tracker API - use this if you want a read-only interface to obtain information about a patient’s prescriptions.
NHS BSA Prescription Services Open Data Portal - download public datasets including Secondary care medicines data (SCMD),  prescriptions issued in England, and Prescription Cost Analysis (PCA) in England.
Directory of Services API - retrieve information about a wide range of health and care services in England with the Directory of Service (DoS) API.
Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions (ETP) web services - access dispenser information for a patient via NHS UK Web Services.
API status

This API is stable.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a simple RESTful API, returning JSON dispenser resources. 

For more details, see basic REST.

Network access

You can access this API via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
the internet

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation
Authentication

This API is user-restricted, meaning that an end user must be present and authenticated to use it.

The end user must be:

the dedicated EPS DoS system user
authenticated, using the EPS DoS system username and password

Authentication for this API uses HTTP basic authentication based on username and password. 

There is a sole dedicated user in DoS for the EPS DoS API.  If you write a client to use this API, you need to obtain the credentials for this dedicated user. You then pass these credentials through to the EPS DoS API using basic HTTP authentication. 

To obtain the credentials for the dedicated DoS system user, contact us. 

Smartcards are not required.

For more details see Authentication.

Authorisation

The API itself does not perform any authorisation checks. Rather, the dedicated EPS DoS system user has a predefined role.

Testing

You can test this API using our Path to Live environments.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

As part of onboarding, this API uses the Common Assurance Process (CAP), which is tailored for each NHS service. For more details, contact us.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see the Develop section in the EPS DoS API specification, particularly the REST Endpoints Reference.

Last edited: 21 January 2022 3:07 pm