Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions Web Services - SOAP API

Get prescription dispenser information for a patient, using NHS UK Web Services.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status and roadmap
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to get Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) dispenser (and dispensing appliance contractor) information for a patient via NHS UK Web Services.

You can search for dispenser information using:

a valid ODS code (previously known as NACS code)
their name and service type (community pharmacy or appliance contractor), and whether they are EPS-enabled or not
their name and location and the service type, and whether they are EPS-enabled or not
their postcode and service type, and whether they are EPS-enabled or not

Use this API if you are building GP software - it provides additional information about dispensing appliance contractors that is not available through Electronic Prescription Service Directory of Services API.

As one of the Directory of Services APIs, this also provides data to the Electronic Prescription Service Directory of Services API.

Before you begin any development work using this API, contact us to discuss your best options.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used to support the delivery of health and social care.

Related APIs

The following APIs are related to this one:

Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API  - access the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) - currently you can only use this new API to prescribe, not dispense

Electronic Prescription Service - HL7 V3 API - access the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) to send prescriptions from prescribers such as GPs to dispensers such as pharmacies using our HL7 V3 API

Electronic Prescription Tracker - REST API - use this if you want a read-only interface to obtain information about a patient’s prescriptions

NHS BSA Prescription Services Open Data Portal - download public datasets including Secondary care medicines data (SCMD),  prescriptions issued in England, and Prescription Cost Analysis (PCA) in England

Directory of Services - REST API - retrieve information about a wide range of health and care services in England with our Directory of Services - REST API

Directory of Services - SOAP API - retrieve information about a wide range of health and care services in England with our Directory of Services - SOAP API

Electronic Prescription Service Directory of Services API - use this API to access limited information about dispensing services
API status and roadmap

This API is stable.

To see our roadmap, or to suggest, comment or vote on features for this API, see our interactive product backlog.

If you have any other queries, please contact us.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a SOAP API. 

For more details, see Basic SOAP.

Network access

This API is available on the internet and, indirectly, on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN). 

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API is open-access, which means:

we do not authenticate or authorise the calling application

we do not authenticate or authorise the end user - they might not even be present

Environments and testing
Environment	Base URL
Integration test	http://etp.nhswebsite-integration.nhs.uk/ETPWebservices/service.asmx/


User Acceptance Testing (UAT)

	

https://nhsuk-etp-staging.nhsuk-appservice-uks.p.azurewebsites.net/ETPWebservices/service.asmx/


Production	

https://nhsuk-etp-production.nhsuk-appservice-uks.p.azurewebsites.net/ETPWebservices/service.asmx/

Integration testing

Our integration test environment is for formal integration testing

For more details see integration testing with our RESTful APIs.

Onboarding

This API is open-access, and there is no onboarding process or assurance required.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions Web Services.

Last edited: 10 February 2022 3:14 pm