Emergency care discharge v2.1
Nearly two million people attend emergency care (EC) services each month and sharing discharge information between Emergency Care and GP practices is essential for ensuring patient safety and good ongoing treatment.
Key benefits
Key information will be transferred directly into the GP record, reducing the risk of transcription errors and improving the quality of information.
Details on the emergency visit will be available more quickly to the GP practice, and the patient’s safety and overall experience will be improved.
Key information will be standardised, which means it will be available for secondary purposes, such as clinical audit and research.
The successful use of the PRSB Emergency Care Discharge Summary Standard depends on the quality of the data collected in emergency departments. Currently emergency department data is not of consistently good quality. The Emergency Care Data Set (ECDS) project started in February 2015 and is being implemented in 2017 to improve the quality of EC data. It therefore made sense for the EC standard work to be co-ordinated with development of the ECDS to ensure compatibility. The ECDS is aligned to the EC discharge standard. However, use of the standard depends on GP systems being able to receive the discharge, so the implementation timescales are different for each.
Endorsement
ADASS – Association of Directors of Adult Social Services
Care Providers Alliance
Royal College of Emergency Medicine
Royal College of General Practictioners
Royal College of Nursing
Royal College of Occupational Therapists
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Psychiatrists
Royal College of Radiologists
Royal Pharmaceutical Society
Institute of Health Records and Information Management
Tech UK
The Standard
Emergency care discharge summary standard

Release Notes V2.1
The Emergency care discharge summary standard has been updated to version 2.1 (Dec 17 2019). V2.1 includes an update to:
– structured dose direction cluster
– structured dose amount
– structured dose timing and dose direction duration.

Release Notes – Emergency Care discharge V2
These release notes document any changes to the standard made in the previous version.

Supporting Documentation
Implementation guidance report
Transfers or care safety case report
Transfers of care hazard log
Final report – Emergency Care discharge standard
Transfer of care FHIR specifications
Example letters
Emergency Care Example Letter 1
Emergency Care Example Letter 2
Emergency Care Example Letter 3
IHRIM record correction guidance

Despite vigilance when filing information in records, mistakes can occur. The Institute of Health Records and Information Management has guidance to support professionals in making corrections following errors.

VIEW THE GUIDANCE