Female Genital Mutilation - Information Sharing - FHIR API

Share female genital mutilation (FGM) information for children under 18 with relevant NHS professionals across England using our Female Genital Mutilation - Information Sharing (FGM-IS) FHIR API.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to share female genital mutilation (FGM) information for children under 18 with relevant NHS professionals across England.

You can:

create an FGM indicator for a patient
delete an FGM indicator for a patient
query a patient's FGM status

This API is only for use when the end user is a healthcare worker, not a patient. 

For more details, see Introduction to the FGM Information Sharing Service.

Note that older versions 1.0 and 2.0.0 are no longer supported.

Spine Mini Service Provider (SMSP) options

There are also commercially available products which give easier access to FGM-IS, known as Spine Mini Service Providers (SMSPs).

These and other conforming software products are listed in our Conformance Catalogue.

If you are interested in becoming a provider of one of these products, see Female Genital Mutilation - Information Sharing - SMSP API standards.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development. 

You must have made this request before you can go live (see 'Onboarding' below).

Related APIs

The following APIs are related to this one:

Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - use this to access patients' personal information, such as name, address, date of birth, related people, registered GP and NHS number 
Female Genital Mutilation - Information Sharing - SMSP API standards - use these to become a Spine Mini Service Provider giving access to FGM information for children under 18 to relevant NHS professionals
API status

This API is in beta.

Note that older versions 1.0 and 2.0.0 are no longer supported.

Service level

This API is a platinum service, meaning it is operational and supported 24 x 7 x 365.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a FHIR API.

Specifically, it is based on the HL7 FHIR DSTU2 1.0.2 specification.

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

You need a Health and Social Care Network (HSCN) connection to use this API.

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API is application-restricted, meaning the calling application is authenticated but the end user is either not authenticated or not present.

In particular, this API uses TLS-MA authentication.

For more details, see application-restricted APIs.

The API does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them.

The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database. For more details, see our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

You can test this API using our Path to Live environments.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

As part of onboarding, this API uses the Common Assurance Process (CAP).

To outline your use case and start the onboarding process, contact us.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see v2.1.1-beta Service Development Assets.

There was also a read-only version 1.0 of this API which is now deprecated, see FGM Risk Indication System v1.0, and a version 2.0.0 which is no longer supported.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 16 March 2022 2:27 pm