Gazetteer Service - SOAP API

Validate or retrieve UK-based postal addresses.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to validate and retrieve UK-based postal addresses, for example before updating a patient's details in the Personal Demographics Service.  Also known as the Address Finder, it can validate and transform the address to the Postcode Address File (PAF) standard, as well as search for and return an address list based on your search criteria.

You can:

get a single search result based on the house number or name and its postcode
get multiple search results based on partial address inputs or wild card searches
do fuzzy searches based on the phonetics of words entered in lines of an address
do intelligent postcode parsing to validate the underlying structure
get the PAF address key for each delivery point

You cannot use this API to update anyone's address.

Data update frequency

At the moment, we only update the data in Gazetteer annually. We are working on updating it more frequently. If this is an issue for you, contact us.

Licensing

This API uses Royal Mail's Postcode Address File (PAF), which is a licensed product. The licence applies to the end user organisation, not to the software developer.

If the end user organisation is a public sector organisation, such as a GP practice or a hospital trust, they can apply for a Public Sector Licence (PSL), which is free, even if they are using commercial software.

Private end user organisations (for example, non-NHS dentists and some types of GP practice) must obtain a commercial PAF licence.

Public sector end user organisations using the API for revenue-generating purposes (such as treating patients privately) must obtain a commercial PAF licence.

Software developers using the API for testing do not need a licence.

Who can use this API

You can only use this API for direct care. If you are unsure whether you have a valid use case, contact us.

Related APIs

This API is commonly used to verify an address before updating a patient's details in the Personal Demographics Service, using one of the following:

the Personal Demographics Service FHIR API
the Personal Demographics Service HL7 V3 API
API status

This API is stable.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a SOAP API. 

For more details, see Basic SOAP.

Network access

You need a Health and Social Care Network (HSCN) connection to use this API.

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API is application-restricted, meaning:

the calling application is authenticated - we do care who it is

the end user is not authenticated - we do not verify who it is or whether they are present

In particular, it uses TLS-MA authentication.

Environments and testing

To use this API in integration, if you do not already have one, get a TLS-MA certificate for the integration environment. To do this, complete a Combined endpoint and service registration request including:

a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) where the common name is populated by the Fully Qualified Doman Name (FQDN)
the environment you need access to - integration
the other fields left blank

 

Environment	Base URL
Integration test - internet	https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/GSWS/GSWS
Integration test - HSCN	https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/GSWS/GSWS
Production - internet	https://address-finder.spineservices.nhs.uk/GSWS/GSWS
Production - HSCN	https://gazetteer.national.ncrs.nhs.uk/GSWS/GSWS

 

Onboarding

To use this API in production:

Confirm your use case. To do this, contact us.
If you do not already have one, get a TLS-MA certificate for the production environment. To do this, see Live/Production Environment.
Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see the Gazetteer Service - EIS Part 4.

Last edited: 21 January 2022 3:21 pm