GP Connect Send Document - FHIR API

Send a PDF consultation summary to a registered GP practice.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to send a PDF consultation summary to a registered GP practice - using GP Connect Messaging.

You can:

create messages to send using MESH
use the HL7 FHIR STU3 interoperability standard to define the message structure
include FHIR messaging information as defined by the ITK3 message distribution standard v2.5.0

For example, to send a document containing a patient's consultation notes to their GP practice when a patient is seen:

at another GP practice than their own
by an out of hours service
by a district nurse at home

Each message sent using this API uses the GP Connect Messaging components, MESH, and ITK3, to deliver the message.

Each message sent is a FHIR Message, defined as a FHIR composition, constructed to meet the ITK3 standard with a specific payload structure.

For more details, see the GP Connect specifications for developers.

Who can use this API

This API can be used by developers of clinical systems that support clinicians delivering direct care.

Before you start development, read the Send Document section of the GP Connect API 1.5.1-beta messaging specification and the prerequisites listed below.  

Prerequisites
Technical

You must:

have access to the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN) or the internet to send ITK3 standard messages over MESH
be Personal Demographics Service (PDS) compliant or capable of performing a PDS search via NHS Digital or a third-party provider
Information governance (IG)

You must:

be compliant with the GP Connect Direct Care API Information Governance Model
manage access to your system locally using local role-based access control (RBAC). This does not need to be compliant with the national RBAC model and GP Connect products do not require smartcards to control access, though they can be used if already implemented
be using the GP Connect APIs for direct care purposes for NHS patients in England
Clinical safety

You must:

have a clinical safety officer (CSO) who is responsible for DCB0129 and, if necessary, DCB0160 . For more on clinical risk management, visit Clinical risk management standards

If you are confident that you can meet the prerequisites, contact us to express your interest. See 'Onboarding' below.

Related APIs

The following APIs and API standards are also related to this API:

Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API  – use this API to look up the registered GP for the patient
Spine Directory Service - FHIR API  – access accredited system information and messaging endpoint details
Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - transfer messages and large files securely across health and social care organisations

Interoperability Toolkit 3 Messaging Distribution FHIR API standards - define a set of generic messaging components using FHIR STU3

API status

This API (v1.5.1) is in beta.

It might not be fully supported by all providing systems. See GP Connect supplier progress for details of provider rollout.

Service level

This API uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a FHIR API.

It sends STU3 message payloads over MESH as defined by ITK3 v2.10.0.

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

You can access this API via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
the internet - but note that devices using NHS smartcards do require HSCN access

 For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

The API does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database.

For more details see our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

The following test environments are available:

Opentest 
Path-to-Live environments 

To test sending a message, see Message sender testing.

Onboarding

If you meet the prerequisites and have a product that can integrate with GP Connect, you should express an interest with us by submitting a use case.

The main purpose of the use case is to help us understand how you plan to use GP Connect APIs and the business issue you are looking to address. You should email your use case to us at gpconnect@nhs.net.

Your use case should include the following information as a minimum:

the business problem you are intending to solve using GP Connect
how GP Connect will be used in practice to benefit patients and staff
which of the GP Connect products you will use to benefit patients and staff
any end user organisations you are currently working with
who your clinical safety officer is and, where available, your clinical risk management process documentation

Once we receive your use case, we'll respond within 14 days.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see Send Document.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 6 May 2022 3:27 pm