GP Connect Access Record: HTML - FHIR API

View a patient's GP practice record, with read-only access.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to view a patient's registered GP practice record, with read-only access.

You can:

view a patient’s primary care record by requesting sections or headings
define a date range to filter larger sections
incorporate these views directly into Electronic Patient Record systems

For example:

GP practices can view all of the patient’s primary care records even when they are held on a different GP system
care settings such as NHS111, ambulance and emergency care, primary care networks (PCNs), secondary care, pharmacy, care homes, community and dentistry can view the records held by the patient’s GP practice to better inform any care decisions they make for a patient

For more details, see the GP Connect specifications for developers.

Who can use this API

This API can be used by developers of clinical systems that support clinicians delivering direct care.

Before you start development, read the GP Connect API v0.7.4 specification and the prerequisites listed below.  

Prerequisites
Technical

You must:

have access to the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
be Personal Demographics Service (PDS) compliant or capable of performing a PDS search via NHS Digital or a third-party provider
Information governance (IG)

You must:

be compliant with the GP Connect Direct Care API Information Governance Model
manage access to your system locally using local role-based access control (RBAC). This does not need to be compliant with the national RBAC model and GP Connect products do not require smartcards to control access, though they can be used if already implemented
be using the GP Connect APIs for direct care purposes for NHS patients in England
Clinical safety

You must:

have a clinical safety officer (CSO) who is responsible for DCB0129 and, if necessary, DCB0160 . For more on clinical risk management, visit Clinical risk management standards

If you are confident that you can meet the prerequisites, contact us to express your interest. See 'Onboarding' below.

Related APIs

The following APIs are also related to this API:

GP Connect Access Record: Structured - FHIR API – use this API to retrieve structured information from a patient’s GP practice record
Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API  – use this API to look up the registered GP for the patient
Spine Directory Service - FHIR API  – access accredited system information and messaging endpoint details
API status

This API (v0.7.4) is stable.

It might not be fully supported by all providing systems. See GP Connect supplier progress for details of provider rollout.

Service level

This API is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a FHIR API. 

It sends a FHIR DSTU2 payload over a Spine Server proxy (SSP) transport.

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

You need a Health and Social Care Network (HSCN) connection to use this API.

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation
Security

Access to the GP Connect APIs is controlled and protected by the Spine Secure Proxy (SSP), a forward HTTP proxy.

It provides a single security point for both authentication and authorisation for consuming systems. Additional responsibilities include auditing of requests, checking data sharing agreements and transaction logging.

All HTTP communications are secured using TLS MA. This includes both legs of the request, from consumer system to the proxy and then from the proxy to provider system.

Authorisation

Authorisation takes place in two locations: 

the consumer system
the SSP

The consumer system must have local RBAC in place and restrict GP Connect APIs to authorised users. With each request, a JSON Web Token (JWT) must be included with the following information:

details of users, including role
where smartcards are used in the consumer system, including SDS user and role IDs
details of the consumer system
details of the consumer’s organisation, including ODS code

The information in the JWT is retained for audit purposes.

The SSP checks data-sharing agreements to ensure that the consumer system is authorised to communicate with the provider system.

Environments and testing
Environment	URL
Internet facing demonstrator 	

https://orange.testlab.nhs.uk/


Opentest environment	https://orange.testlab.nhs.uk/opentest.html
Integration (INT)	Provided during onboarding process
Onboarding
Expressing an interest

If you meet the prerequisites and have a product that can integrate with GP Connect, you should express an interest with us by submitting a use case.

The main purpose of the use case is to help us understand how you plan to use GP Connect APIs and the business issue you are looking to address. You should email your use case to us at gpconnect@nhs.net.

Your use case should include the following information as a minimum:

the business problem you are intending to solve using GP Connect
how GP Connect will be used in practice to benefit patients and staff
which of the GP Connect products you will use to benefit patients and staff
any end user organisations you are currently working with
who your clinical safety officer is

Once we receive your use case, we'll respond within 14 days.

Consumer assurance process

Once we approve your use case, we support you through the assurance process to go live. We will discuss the assurance process and artefacts with you to help you understand our requirements.

Start your development work within 6 months of use case approval. If you miss this date, a review or new submission of the use case will be required. Changes or additional development will also require a review or new use case submission. 

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see GP Connect API v0.7.4.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 7 June 2022 2:18 pm