GP Connect Access Document - FHIR API

Retrieve unstructured documents from a patient’s GP practice record.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Additional guidance: Clinical safety and hazard log
Overview

Use this API to retrieve unstructured documents from a patient’s GP practice record. Unstructured documents are usually clinical documents received from various health and care settings and held by a patient's registered GP practice.

You can:

search for a patient’s documents
retrieve a document

For example, a district nurse attends a patient at home and views their hospital discharge summary held by their GP practice.

For more details, see the GP Connect specifications for developers.

Who can use this API

This API can be used by developers of clinical systems that support clinicians delivering direct care.

Before you start development, read the GP Connect API 1.5.0-beta specification and the prerequisites listed below.  

Prerequisites
Technical

You must:

have access to the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
be Personal Demographics Service (PDS) compliant or capable of performing a PDS search via NHS Digital or a third-party provider
Information governance (IG)

You must:

be compliant with the GP Connect Direct Care API Information Governance Model
manage access to your system locally using local role-based access control (RBAC). This does not need to be compliant with the national RBAC model and GP Connect products do not require smartcards to control access, though they can be used if already implemented
be using the GP Connect APIs for direct care purposes for NHS patients in England
Clinical safety

You must:

have a clinical safety officer (CSO) who is responsible for DCB0129 and, if necessary, DCB0160 . For more on clinical risk management, visit Clinical risk management standards

If you are confident that you can meet the prerequisites, contact us to express your interest. See 'Onboarding' below.

Related APIs

The following APIs are also related to this API:

GP Connect Access Record: Structured - FHIR API – use this API to retrieve structured information from a patient’s GP practice record
Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API  – use this API to look up the registered GP for the patient
Spine Directory Service - FHIR API  – access accredited system information and messaging endpoint details
API status

The current working version is 1.5.0, which is in beta and available to all consumers, subject to an approved use case and onboarding process. As well as medications and allergies, version 1.5.0 includes the majority of the clinical record.

It does not include:

extended demographics information - for example, about carers
flags and alerts
templates
test requests

Read the specification for the exact details.

It may not be fully supported by all providing systems. See GP Connect supplier progress for details of provider rollout.

Roadmap

The next planned version is 1.6.0, which is currently in beta. The 1.6.0 specification contains the full scope of 1.5.0, but additionally it introduces a new message to support GP2GP transactions. It is important to understand that the GP2GP transactions do not affect the consumer build. 1.6.0 will be backward compatible with the 1.5.0 specification.

Service level

This API is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This is a synchronous API. It conforms to the FHIR global standard for health care data exchange. Specifically, it is aligned with FHIR UK Core, which is built on FHIR Release 3. 

It uses a FHIR Operation that requires you to make a HTTP POST of a FHIR Parameters resource to the provider endpoint. The resource contains parameters that correspond to the requested clinical information – for example, medications, allergies or problems.

We use this approach instead of a resource-based RESTful API in the interests of clinical safety. The provider system constructs a response that contains all clinical information relating to the request to ensure that the clinical information is interpreted safely.

Network access

You need a Health and Social Care Network (HSCN) connection to use this API.

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation
Security

Access to the GP Connect APIs is controlled and protected by the Spine Secure Proxy (SSP), a forward HTTP proxy.

It provides a single security point for both authentication and authorisation for consuming systems. Additional responsibilities include auditing of requests, checking data sharing agreements and transaction logging.

All HTTP communications are secured using TLS MA. This includes both legs of the request, from consumer system to the proxy and then from the proxy to provider system.

Authorisation

Authorisation takes place in two locations: 

the consumer system
the SSP

The consumer system must have local RBAC in place and restrict GP Connect APIs to authorised users. With each request, a JSON Web Token (JWT) must be included with the following information:

details of users, including role
where smartcards are used in the consumer system, including SDS user and role IDs
details of the consumer system
details of the consumer’s organisation, including ODS code

The information in the JWT is retained for audit purposes.

The SSP checks data-sharing agreements to ensure that the consumer system is authorised to communicate with the provider system.

Environments and testing
Environment	URL
Internet facing demonstrator 	

https://orange.testlab.nhs.uk/


Opentest environment	https://orange.testlab.nhs.uk/opentest.html
Integration (INT)	Provided during onboarding process

We have 2 testing streams:

clinical testing
technical testing

Each stream is complicated in its own right and we've designed them to run in parallel to help you to work with us more easily and to consider your system design in a holistic way, rather than having to complete one stream before the other.

Clinical testing

The aim of clinical testing is to ensure the safe interoperability of information exported from GP systems and then processed or displayed in a consuming system. 

To help you test that your consuming system is clinically safe, we have created the following resources:

a patient record or, for some more complex areas, 2 records that can be requested from the GP Connect demonstrator
a description of each of the data items, what it is intending to test and the hazards that it is intended to mitigate
notes and guidance about each clinical area that describe how to process and display the data that it contains in a safe way

See Clinical test data.

Technical testing

The purpose of technical testing is to help you assure the messaging capability of your system via the Spine with GP Connect provider FHIR endpoints. It ensures the consumer requests conform to FHIR standards as per the specification. In addition, it maintains the integrity of the data displayed to the user and assures pertinent functional requirements. It does not assure the message payload, which is covered in clinical assurance.

See Consumer Supplier Test Assurance for achieving Technical Conformance (PDF) for full details of the technical conformance process and relevant artefacts.

Onboarding
Expressing an interest

If you meet the prerequisites and have a product that can integrate with GP Connect, you should express an interest with us by submitting a use case.

The main purpose of the use case is to help us understand how you plan to use GP Connect APIs and the business issue you are looking to address. You should email your use case to us at gpconnect@nhs.net.

Your use case should include the following information as a minimum:

the business problem you are intending to solve using GP Connect
how GP Connect will be used in practice to benefit patients and staff
which of the GP Connect products you will use to benefit patients and staff
any end user organisations you are currently working with
who your clinical safety officer is and, where available, your clinical risk management process documentation

Once we receive your use case, we'll respond within 14 days.

Consumer assurance process

Once we approve your use case, we support you through the assurance process to go live. We will discuss the assurance process and artefacts with you to help you understand our requirements.

Start your development work within 6 months of use case approval. If you miss this date, a review or new submission of the use case will be required. Changes or additional development will also require a review or new use case submission. For full details of the technical conformance process, see GP Connect Consumer Supplier Test Assurance for achieving Technical Conformance (PDF).

Clinical assurance process

We are here to support you to develop clinically safe systems in line with your responsibility to achieve the relevant DCB0129 or DCB0160 clinical safety standards. 

We host a series of meetings to help you develop clinically safe systems:

initial meeting
clinical safety process readiness review meeting
clinical evaluation of readiness for deployment meeting

For more information, see Clinical assurance process details.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see GP Connect API v1.5.0-beta – which contains Access Document.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Additional guidance: Clinical safety and hazard log
Clinical safety approach

Your organisation must have a clinical safety officer. Information standards underpin national healthcare initiatives from the Department of Health, NHS England, the Care Quality Commission, and other national health organisations. They provide the mechanism for introducing requirements to which the NHS, those with whom it commissions services and its IT system suppliers, must conform.

The following two standards relating to clinical safety are accepted for publication under section 250 of the Health and Social Care Act 2012 by the Data Coordination Board (DCB). In line with current DCB practice, each standard comprises:

a specification, which defines the requirements and conformance criteria to be met by the user of the standard - how these requirements are met is the responsibility of the user
implementation guidance, which provides an interpretation of the requirements and, where appropriate, defines possible approaches to achieving them

Compliance with DCB0129 and DCB0160 is mandatory under the Health and Social Care Act 2012 (Clinical risk management standards - NHS Digital).

Clinical safety guidance 

The Guide for Access Record: Structured  is also applicable to this API. It helps clinical safety officers assure GP Connect consumer systems into their own organisations. It includes details of the clinical safety standards that consumer suppliers and their commissioning organisations must be compliant with (DCB0129 and DCB0160).

Clinical safety principles shows you who is responsible for the clinical safety of GP Connect specifications and consumer systems.

Hazard log

The GP Connect Access Record: Structured generic hazard log shows you the clinical risks of using GP Connect functionality through a consumer system. Use it to identify the clinical risks of consuming clinical data and presenting it in your system, and record these in your own system-specific hazard log. If necessary, take mitigating action to ensure clinical safety.

Last edited: 6 May 2022 3:20 pm