Healthy child standard
An innovative standard for child health that helps everyone involved in caring for children share information using standardised paperless digital records.
The PRSB has produced standards for child health records to support the Healthy Child Programme and its prevention agenda. The standard spells out what information on screening tests, immunisations and developmental milestones should be accessible to make sure that children receive appropriate care. The goal is that everyone involved in a child’s care, including parents, will in the future have secure access to a standardised set of paperless, digital child health records.
Endorsement
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Nursing
Royal College of General Practitioners
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
The Royal College of Occupational Therapists
The Royal College of Paediatrics & Child Health
The Royal College of Midwives
The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists
The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy
Community Practitioners and Health Visitors Association
Association of British Paediatric Nurses
British Association of Community Child Health
British Academy of Childhood Disability
British Association of Perinatal Medicine
Association of UK Dieticians
British & Irish Orthoptic Society
Institute of Health Records Information Management (IHRIM)
TechUK
Supported by: Clinical leadership was provided by the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH) and the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). Work was conducted in partnership with the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) Health Informatics Unit (HIU).
The standard

Healthy child standard specification

Current release – 08/10/2020
Release number – Amd 11/2020

Information standards notice (ISN)
The ISN informs service providers that the Healthy child record must be adopted and gives the time frame for doing this, along with the relevant guidance materials and previous releases.

Supporting documentation
Implementation Guidance
Section specific implementation guidance
Healthy child record final report
Information standards notice
Clinical safety case report
Technical Specifications – Should local areas wish to share data in their region then this should be done as an electronic message. These are available on NHS Developer Network and will be updated as the development cycle continues.
IHRIM record correction guidance

Despite vigilance when filing information in records, mistakes can occur. The Institute of Health Records and Information Management has guidance to support professionals in making corrections following errors.

VIEW THE GUIDANCE