National Data Opt-out - FHIR API

Capture patients' preferences and control sharing of their data by healthcare organisations for planning and research purposes with our National Data Opt-out (NDOP) FHIR API.

 

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Environments and testing
Interactions

This API is currently for internal NHS Digital use only.

Overview

Use this API to capture patients' preferences and control sharing of their data by healthcare organisations for planning and research purposes using National Data Opt-out (NDOP). 

You can:

create National Data Opt-out preferences for a patient
get existing National Data Opt-out preferences for a patient
update the National Data Opt-out preferences for a patient
display transaction history of National Data Opt-out preferences for a patient
Who can use this API

This API is currently for internal NHS Digital use only.

API status

This API is in beta.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a FHIR API.

Specifically, it is based on the HL7 FHIR STU3 3.0.1 Messaging Implementation, April 2017. 

For more details, see FHIR.

Network access

This API is available on the internet and, indirectly, on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details, see Network access for APIs.

Environments and testing

There are several independent instances of this API available for testing, each with a different base URL:

Spine environment	Network availability	Base URL
Development	HSCN	https://msg.dev.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Integration	HSCN	https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Deployment	HSCN	https://msg.dep.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Production	Internet	https://clinicals.spineservices.nhs.uk/
Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see Consent REST.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 15 February 2022 3:57 pm