National Event Management Service - FHIR API

Publish and subscribe to patient-centric healthcare event messages with the National Events Management Service (NEMS) FHIR API.  This national service is implemented on the NHS Spine. 

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview

Use this API to publish and subscribe to patient-centric healthcare event messages with the National Events Management Service (NEMS).  This national service is implemented on the NHS Spine.

As a sending system, you can:

publish an event message

As a subscribing system, you can:

create a subscription
read a subscription 
delete a subscription

NEMS supports a specific range of healthcare event messages.

NEMS authorises a specific list of system suppliers and health and social care organisations to publish information as events.

For more details, see the Introduction to the National Events Management Service.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so.

Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development. To do this, contact us. 

For details of the legal basis for sharing NEMS healthcare events, see the NEMS controller catalogue.

You must do this before you can go live (see 'Onboarding' below).

Related APIs

The following APIs are related to this one:

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this to collect event messages that you subscribed to
National Record Locator - FHIR API - use this to find and retrieve published information, which might have been sent via a NEMS event message prior to your subscription

A number of other APIs use NEMS as a publish-subscribe event mechanism. For a full list, see our API catalogue, filtered on NEMS APIs.

API status

This API is stable.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is a publish-subscribe event API.

All endpoints use FHIR, specifically FHIR STU3, and:

the subscription endpoints use RESTful FHIR 
the publish endpoint uses FHIR messaging

To collect events that you have subscribed to, use our MESH API.

The message payload is also FHIR - the same format as used by the sending system.

Network access

This API is available on the internet and on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This API is application-restricted, meaning the calling application is authenticated but the end user is either not authenticated or not present.

In particular, this API uses TLS-MA authentication.

It also implements authorisation controls which restrict the event types the connecting application can subscribe to or publish.

For more details, see application-restricted APIs.

Environments and testing

NEMS is available in Opentest for early development and testing.

NEMS is also available for testing purposes in:

development (DEV)
integration (INT)
deployment (DEP)

The base URLs are as follows:

Environment	Network availability	URL
OpenTest	OpenVPN	https://msg.opentest.hscic.gov.uk/
Development	HSCN	https://msg.dev.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Integration	HSCN	https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Integration	Internet	https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/
Deployment	HSCN	https://msg.dep.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/
Production	HSCN	Contact us
Production	Internet	Contact us

The  base URL for the publishing and subscribing interactions are the same, but the path is different, for example:

publish in integration over HSCN:
https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/STU3/Events/1/$process-message
subscribe in integration over HSCN:
https://msg.int.spine2.ncrs.nhs.uk/STU3/Subscription
publish in integration over the internet:
https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Events/1/$process-message
subscribe in integration over the internet:
https://msg.intspineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Subscription

There is a testing tool which allows you to simulate a provider publishing event messages. You can also simulate making changes on PDS to trigger PDS-published event messages so you can test event message consumption.

To get advice on how to begin testing, contact us.

For more details, see the NEMS onboarding guide on getting access to Opentest and the integration (INT) test environment.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

As part of onboarding, this API uses the Supplier Conformance Assessment List (SCAL) process.

For full details, including downloading the NEMS onboarding guide, see onboarding and assurance.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this API, see Publish an Event Message and Subscriptions Overview.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 15 March 2022 11:24 am