Organisation Data Service - FHIR API

Access a reduced dataset of health and social care organisations in England and Wales, such as trusts or GP practices, using our Organisation Data Service (ODS) FHIR API. 

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status and roadmap
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions

Possible API outage - 4 April 2022

Expected outage to be 1 to 2 minutes between 1pm and 4pm.

Rate limits

This API is not designed for high volume usage - to ensure a good level of service you should aim to keep usage below 5 requests per second.

We are working on increasing the capacity of the API. If you have an exceptional need for higher throughput, contact us to discuss your options.

Overview

Use this API to access a reduced dataset of health and social care organisations in England and Wales, such as trusts or GP practices, using our Organisation Data Service (ODS). This FHIR API contains a reduced dataset, most useful for helping with transactions, while the ODS ORD API contains the full dataset from ODS.

You can search for information about an organisation using one or more of their:

ODS code
last updated date
name
active or inactive status
postcode or city
organisation's role or primary role, such as trusts or GP practices

You can also limit the number of results returned, or just request a count of the number of search results.

For more details, see the Introduction to FHIR® ODS Lookup API.

You cannot:

access the full dataset from ODS

search for an organisation with an address

An ODS code is a unique identification codes for an organisation that interact with any area of the NHS. This API returns the following reduced dataset of an organisation, when searched with an ODS code:

organisation - ODS code, name, open date, close  date, last change date and status if active or inactive
address - house or flat number, line 1, line 2, line 3, town, postcode and country
contacts - email, website, telephone and fax
roles - primary and non-primary roles

For an alternative API that returns full dataset, see Related APIs below.

Who can use this API

This API can only be used to support the delivery of health and social care.

Related APIs

The following API also gives access to the Organisation Data Service:

ODS Organisation Reference Data (ORD) API - use this API to access the full dataset from ODS. 

To choose which API best suits your needs, see the Benefits of the ODS API suite.

The following API is also related to this API:

Spine Directory Service - FHIR API - use this API to access ASID information and messaging endpoint details in the Spine Directory Service (SDS) using our FHIR-conformant API.

API status and roadmap

This API is stable.

To see our roadmap, or to suggest, comment or vote on features for this API, see our interactive product backlog.

If you have any other queries, contact us.

Service level

This API is a bronze service, meaning it is operational and supported only during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This API is RESTful.

It also conforms to the FHIR global standard for health care data exchange. Specifically, it is based on the HL7 FHIR STU3 Messaging Implementation.

You do not need to know much about FHIR to use this API - FHIR APIs are just RESTful APIs that follow specific rules. In particular:

resource names are capitalised, singular and in American English, for example /Organization not /organisations

array names are singular, for example line not lines for address lines

data items that are country-specific and thus not included in the FHIR global base resources are usually wrapped in an extension object

There are libraries and SDKs available to help with FHIR API integration. 

Network access

This API is available on the internet and, indirectly, on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

Security and authorisation

This API is open-access, which means:

we do not authenticate or authorise the calling application
we do not authenticate or authorise the end user - they might not even be present

We generally use open-access APIs for public data, where security is not a concern. Our open-access APIs are generally RESTful APIs. For more details on how to access them, see our open-access REST API tutorial.

Environments and testing
Environments	Base URLs


User acceptance test (UAT)

	https://uat.directory.spineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/
Production	https://directory.spineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/

For example:

https://uat.directory.spineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Organization/RJY 

returns the reduced dataset for the organisation whose ODS code is RJY. 

Integration testing

You can use the UAT environment to perform your integration testing.

Onboarding

This API is open-access, and there is no onboarding process or assurance required.

Interactions

The following table summarises the endpoints of this API.

Endpoint	Endpoint URLs	Description
Read	https://directory.spineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Organization/[ODS code]	Returns the reduced dataset of a single organisation for the specified ODS code.
Search	https://directory.spineservices.nhs.uk/STU3/Organization?[SearchParameters]	Returns a summary of multiple organisations when searched with one or many search parameters.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 25 March 2022 4:10 pm