Pathology Messaging - EDIFACT

Receive pathology test results in GP practices from laboratories.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this
Related APIs
Status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions

This integration is in production, but under review for deprecation. 

If you are developing a new integration, consider using the Pathology Messaging - FHIR integration instead.

If you have any concerns, contact us.

Overview
send test results
Pathology system
MESH
GP system
receive test results

 

Use this integration to receive structured pathology test results in GP practices from pathology laboratories.

This integration uses MESH to send and receive UN/EDIFACT based messages. 

For more details, see the Pathology EDIFACT v1.003 Standard.

If you are building a system to receive pathology test results, you can use our Lab Results adaptor to receive these EDIFACT results via an easy-to-use FHIR-compliant format. 

Before you begin any development work using this integration, contact us to discuss your best options.

Who can use this

This integration can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below).

Related APIs

The following API is related to this integration:

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this API to transfer messages and large files securely across health and social care organisations

The following screening integrations are similar to this one:

Bowel Cancer Screening - EDIFACT - use this to receive bowel cancer screening test results in GP practices from the screening system using EDIFACT messages sent over MESH
Cervical Screening - EDIFACT - use this to receive cervical screening test results in GP practices from the screening system using EDIFACT messages sent over MESH
Status

This integration is in production, but under review for deprecation. 

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration uses asynchronous messaging. Messages are:

formatted as EDIFACT
sent and received via MESH

For more details, see EDIFACT and MESH.

Lab Results adaptor

If you are building a system to receive pathology test results, you can use our Lab Results adaptor to receive these EDIFACT results via an easy-to-use FHIR-compliant format. 

Network access

You can access this integration via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)
the internet

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This integration uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

The integration does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database.

For more details see our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

This integration uses MESH. As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live. The onboarding process can sometimes be quite long, so it's worth planning well ahead.

This integration has a specific onboarding process for new market entrant GP IT developers. This applies whether you are integrating with it directly or using our Lab results adaptor. Contact your GP IT delivery lead for more details.

For other use cases, contact us.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this integration, see ISB 1557 EDIFACT Pathology Messaging.

You can also use our Lab Results adaptor to receive these EDIFACT results via an easy-to-use FHIR-compliant format. 

Last edited: 13 October 2022 1:12 pm