Pathology Messaging - FHIR

Share pathology results from a Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) to the requestor in NHS primary or secondary care settings.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this
Related APIs
Status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview
Pathology  system
MESH
NHS healthcare system
4. receive pathology
results message
1. send request for
pathology results
3. send pathology
results message
2. receive request for
pathology results

 

Use this integration to share pathology results from a Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) to the requestor, typically a healthcare worker in NHS primary or secondary care.

Initially it focuses on haematology and clinical biochemistry test reporting - also known as chemical pathology.

This integration uses MESH to send and receive pathology results.

It is intended to replace the current Pathology Messaging - EDIFACT API and supersedes Laboratory HL7 V3 (see the Message Implementation Manual under Domains -> Health and Clinical Management -> Laboratory).

Who can use this

This integration can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below).

Related APIs

The following APIs and integrations are also related to this integration:

Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) API - use this to transfer messages securely across health and social care organisations

Pathology Messaging - HL7 V3 API - use this to request NHS Newborn Blood Spot (NBS) laboratory tests and send the results back to the requester, using our client side MHS adaptor that you can integrate into your own infrastructure

Pathology Messaging - EDIFACT - use this to send pathology results from pathology laboratories to the requestor, using UN/EDIFACT based messages sent over MESH

Cervical Screening - EDIFACT - use this to receive cervical screening test results in GP practices from the screening system using EDIFACT messages sent over MESH

Additionally, use the following API standard to implement this integration:

Interoperability Toolkit 3 Messaging Distribution FHIR API standards - use this API standard to implement a set of generic messaging components using HL7 FHIR STU3 to create a unified approach to NHS message and document flows across England
Status

This integration is not available in production and is experimental - an early pre-alpha version under development.

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration uses asynchronous messaging. The messages take the form of FHIR STU3 messages sent via MESH.

For more details, see FHIR and MESH.

Network access

You can access this integration via:

the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN)

the internet

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This integration uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

The integration does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. The authorisation rules are specified in our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database.

For more details see our national Role Based Access Control (RBAC) database on the registration authorities and smartcards page.

Environments and testing

This integration uses MESH.

As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

This integration is not available for onboarding yet.

Interactions

For a full list of interactions for this integration, see National Pathology FHIR Messaging Specifications.

Last edited: 23 August 2022 11:17 am