Transfer of Care Mental Health Discharge - FHIR

Create and transmit documents containing Transfer of Care information supporting a mental health discharge.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Status
Service level
Technology
Interactions
Overview
Inpatient or day case system
MESH
GP system
send mental
health adult discharge summary
receive mental health adult discharge summary

 

Use this integration to create and transmit documents containing Transfer of Care information supporting a mental health discharge.

An Inpatient and Day Case Discharge Summary (Mental Health) Document (also known as an ITK3 Mental Health Discharge) is an ITK3 FHIR document containing Transfer of Care information supporting a mental health adult discharge summary to a GP practice.

For example, following an apparent overdose, a patient is admitted to a psychiatric ward for evaluation and treatment which is successful. He is discharged and the consultant sends a copy of the Mental Health Discharge to his GP.

This API is a messaging API which uses MESH to send and receive messages. It is part of a suite of Transfer of Care FHIR message specifications.

Before you begin any development work using this integration, contact us to discuss your best options.

Status

This integration is in production.

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service,  meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration uses MESH to send and receive messages.

The message payload conforms to the FHIR global standard for health care data exchange. Specifically, it conforms to FHIR STU3 and to our ITK3 Messaging Distribution standard.

Interactions

For details of the interactions for this integration, see Transfer of Care message specifications.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 14 October 2022 10:11 am