Transfer of Care Outpatient Clinic Letter - FHIR

Create and transmit documents containing Transfer of Care information following an outpatient consultation in a clinic.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Status
Service level
Technology
Interactions
Overview
Outpatient clinic system
MESH
NHS healthcare systems
send outpatient clinic letter
receive outpatient clinic letter

 

Use this integration to create and transmit documents containing Transfer of Care information following an outpatient consultation in a clinic.

An Outpatient Clinic Letter (also known as an ITK3 Outpatient Letter) is an ITK3 FHIR document containing Transfer of Care information from the hospital to the patient's GP and other relevant parties following a consultation in a clinic.

For example, a patient suffering from double vision is referred to an eye hospital and subsequently attends their outpatient appointment. Investigations indicate hypertropia, and the ophthalmologist recommends glasses fitted with prisms for treatment. The ophthalmologist completes and sends an Outpatient Clinic Letter to her GP.

This integration uses MESH to send and receive messages. It is part of a suite of Transfer of Care FHIR specifications.

Before you begin any development work using this integration, contact us to discuss your best options.

Status

This integration is stable.

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration uses MESH to send and receive messages.

The message payload conforms to the FHIR global standard for health care data exchange. Specifically, it conforms to FHIR STU3 and to our ITK3 Messaging Distribution standard.

Interactions

For details of the interactions for this integration, see Transfer of Care message specifications.

For details on the general structure of the interactions, see FHIR.

Last edited: 21 July 2022 9:52 am