Vaccination Adverse Reactions COVID-19

Provide information to NHS Digital on adverse reactions relating to coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this
Related APIs
Status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Interactions
Overview
Point-of-care application
MESH
NHS Digital
send vaccination adverse reaction information
receive vaccination adverse reaction information

 

Use this integration to provide information to us at NHS Digital on adverse reactions.

You can send us information on adverse reactions relating to: 

coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations.

This integration specifies the flow of information relating to vaccination-related adverse reactions from any healthcare setting including:

hospital hubs - NHS providers vaccinating on site 

local vaccine services – community or primary care led services which could include primary care facilities, retail, community facilities, temporary structures or roving teams 

vaccination centres – large sites such as sports and conference venues set up for high volumes of people 

This integration uses MESH to send pipe-delimited files to us.

For FHIR standards relating to the flow of information directly back to the patient's GP, see Digital Medicine - FHIR.

Regulatory reporting

This information flow captures any adverse reactions which occur within the first fifteen minutes after administration of the coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccination. 

At NHS Digital, we must share this information with the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) Yellow Card scheme. This scheme is the UK system for collecting and monitoring information on suspected safety concerns or incidents involving medicines and medical devices, including vaccines. 

The information we share with MHRA as part of this scheme is anonymised.

Who can use this

This integration can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development, by contacting us.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below). 

Related APIs

The following APIs and integrations are also related to this one:

Vaccination - use this to provide information to NHS Digital relating to coronavirus (COVID-19) and seasonal flu 2020-21 vaccinations
Vaccination Events - FHIR - use this to publish and receive messages about changes to a patient's vaccination details
Digital Medicine - FHIR - use this to notify a patient's registered GP practice of care services provided by a pharmacy, such as immunisation
Status

This integration is stable.

Service level

This integration uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

This integration specifies pipe-delimited files sent over MESH.

For more details, see MESH.

Network access

This integration is available on the internet and on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

This integration uses MESH which is an application-restricted API.

This integration does not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. 

Environments and testing

This integration uses MESH.

As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

For more details, contact us at vaccinations.assurance@nhs.net.

Interactions

This is a Microsoft Word file.  To request a different format, contact us.

Adverse Reaction specification V1.1 - COVID-19

DOCX 444 KB

Last edited: 21 July 2022 9:53 am