Vaccination APIs

Provide information to NHS Digital relating to coronavirus (COVID-19) and seasonal flu 2021-22 vaccinations.

Page contents
Top of page
Overview
Who can use this API
Related APIs
API status
Service level
Technology
Network access
Security and authorisation
Environments and testing
Onboarding
Latest addenda
Interactions
Additional guidance
Overview

Use these APIs to provide vaccination information to us at NHS Digital.

You can send us information relating to:

coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations
COVID-19 extended data attributes
COVID-19 hourly vaccination aggregate data for the NHS Foundry
seasonal flu 2021-22 vaccinations
measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccinations

These APIs specify the flow of vaccination-related information from healthcare settings including:

hospital hubs - NHS providers vaccinating on site 

local vaccine services – community or primary care led services which could include primary care facilities, retail, community facilities, temporary structures or roving teams 

vaccination centres – large sites such as sports and conference venues set up for high volumes of people 

These APIs consist of delimited files sent to us over MESH.

For more details on how to interact with end users to collect COVID-19 information safely, see the functional specifications under 'Additional guidance'.

For FHIR standards relating to the flow of information directly back to the patient's GP, see Digital Medicine - FHIR API.

For FHIR standards relating to the flow of information to other care providers such as Child Health, see Vaccination Events - FHIR API.

Who can use this API

These APIs can only be used where there is a legal basis to do so. Make sure you have a valid use case before you go too far with your development, by contacting us.

You must do this before you can go live (see ‘Onboarding’ below). 

Related APIs

The following APIs are also related to these:

Vaccination Adverse Reactions COVID-19 API - use this to provide information to NHS Digital on adverse reactions relating to coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccinations.
Vaccination Events - FHIR API - use this to send and receive messages about changes to a patient's vaccination details.
Digital Medicine - FHIR API - use this to notify a patient's registered GP practice of care services provided by a pharmacy, such as immunisation.
API status

These APIs are stable.

Service level

This API uses MESH which is a silver service, meaning it is operational 24 x 7 x 365 but only supported during business hours (8am to 6pm), Monday to Friday excluding bank holidays.

For more details, see service levels.

Technology

These APIs consist of delimited files you send to us over MESH.

Some are pipe-delimited, others are not-sign-delimited files. For details, see the individual specification.

Network access

These APIs are available on the internet and on the Health and Social Care Network (HSCN).

For more details see Network access for APIs.

Security and authorisation

These APIs use MESH which is an application-restricted API.

These APIs do not perform any end user authentication or authorisation checks. Rather, the calling system is expected to perform them. 

Environments and testing

These APIs use MESH.

As a developer, you are most likely to want to connect to MESH using either the MESH client or the MESH API.

For more details about using the MESH client, see MESH client.

For the MESH API, there are several independent, externally accessible instances of MESH you can use for testing. For full details, see MESH API - Environments and testing.

Onboarding

You must get your software onboarded before it can go live.

For more details, contact us at vaccinations.assurance@nhs.net.

Latest addenda

These are Microsoft Word files. To request a different format, contact us.

Removal of £10 supplementary payment for severely immunosuppressed individuals V1.0

DOCX 96 KB

POC system updates to accommodate COVID-19 vaccinations with Comirnaty® Ready to Use V1.1

DOCX 112 KB

POC to restrict retrospective COVID-19 vaccination event record entries V1.0

DOCX 86 KB

Vaxzevria® (AstraZeneca) Vaccine Rebranding V1.1

DOCX 101 KB

POC system updates to accommodate reporting of COVID-19 vaccinations for 5 to 11 children not at risk V1.0

DOCX 96 KB

POC system updates to support subsequent boosters V1.0

DOCX 93 KB

POC system updates to accommodate COVID-19 vaccinations for ‘at-risk’ 5 to 11 children V1.2

DOCX 117 KB
Interactions

These are Microsoft Word files. To request a different format, contact us.

Extended attributes for additional data capture V1.4 - COVID-19

DOCX 435 KB

Hourly vaccination system aggregate data specification V1.2 - COVID-19

DOCX 494 KB

MMR vaccination - technical specification for GPIT suppliers to NHS Digital delimited extract V1.1

DOCX 489 KB

NHS Digital daily clinical vaccination extract technical specification v4.0 approved

DOCX 470 KB
Additional guidance

Use these functional specifications to understand how your system must interact with end users in order to collect information safely and assist in decision making, relating to COVID-19 vaccinations.

These are Microsoft Word files. To request a different format, contact us.  

NHS Digital Functional Spec for Additional PoC Data Capture v3.0 Approved

DOCX 444 KB

Overall specification for point of care systems V4.0 – COVID-19

DOCX 2 MB

Vaccine specific information for suppliers of point of care systems V3.2 - COVID-19

DOCX 427 KB

Functional specification for capture of clinical screening questions at point of care V3.4 - COVID-19

DOCX 430 KB

Functional specification for immunisation status V1.0 - flu and COVID-19

DOCX 970 KB

Last edited: 12 May 2022 10:31 am